---
title: example post 1
categories:
- science
- philosophy

---

Post-Kuhnian philosophy of science saw a major shift in the emphasis philosophers put on describing the scientific enterprise. 17th-19th century philosophy seemed to be more focused on how we as individuals can come to investigate, study, and understand reality (Bacon, Locke, Leibniz, etc). Late 19th-early 20th century showed skepticism towards this goal, and instead attempted to legitimize science while denying our access to objective knowledge (Kant, Popper, etc). Early-mid 20th century we now see a movement towards viewing science as a social project of fundamentally imperfect, partisan, subjective humans, which scientists wield not as a process for discovering facts about the world, but rather as a tool for political power, and status for themselves and their group. 



Recent philosophers have taken Kant’s epistemology to its conclusion and relegated science to the sharing of subjective narratives, which are equally detached from reality as the mystical narratives of primitive tribes. The scientific community is one among many, operating within a set of standards and methods that are merely different, not superior, to any other social community. According to this view, when scientists are reporting and interpreting the results of their experiments, it is epistemologically equivalent to “my favorite food is pizza”, in that we are not describing the world, rather we are exchanging subjective narratives, which furthermore, are completely determined by our culture and group identity. Of course this argument, and any argument that denies the possibility of objective knowledge, is entirely self-refuting since it can be applied to the argument itself.
