---
title: Biopsych paper
categories:
- science
excerpt: |
  this is an excerpt for a blog post

---
The Neurobiology of Major Depressive Disorder; Current Findings, Limitations, and Future Directions
Christopher Huong


Approximately 405 million people suffer from depression globally (Whiteford et al., 2013), with a lifetime prevalence of 20-30% (Kruijshaar et al., 2005), and a proportion of those developing treatment-resistant chronic depression (Mueller et al., 1999). Moreover, lost productivity due to poor mental health is estimated to cost the global economy $2.5T annually and is projected to more than double over the next decade, reaching $6T by 2030 (Collaborators, 2022; Health, 2020). The COVID-19 pandemic may also have contributed to the decline of population mental health and well-being worldwide. Evidence from reviews is somewhat mixed, but findings suggest there has been an increase in depressive and anxiety symptoms most consistently in younger and female cohorts (Panchal et al., 2021; Patel et al., 2022; Prati & Mancini, 2021; Samji et al., 2022).

From antiquity, etiological theories of disease, including mental afflictions, relied on supernatural and divine forces, from the Babylonian demons and ghosts (Wilson & Reynolds, 1990) to the myths and epics of early Greek gods (Porter, 2003).  A naturalistic, rational, and scientific medicine began in ancient Greece with Hippocrates’ (460 – 370 BC) who developed the theory of humors, where the balance of four bodily fluids or substances (blood, phlegm, black bile, and yellow bile) were constitutive of individual health and illness. Thus, physiological causes were attributed to physical and ‘spiritual’ diseases, including to what we would today recognize as epileptic symptoms (Chadwick & Mann, 1950).

Modern psychiatry having undergone a ‘biological revolution’ (Harrington, 2019), following the lead of the major achievements in biomedicine, has turned its focus to Kraepelinian classification and diagnosis under a medical model (Guze, 1992), where psychopathological symptoms are broadly construed as indicative of an underlying physiological disturbance. The success of monoamine oxidase inhibitor antidepressants of the 1950s sparked speculation that depression was caused by a biochemical deficiency, specifically in serotonin (Coppen, 1967), a hypothesis that has not borne out (Moncrieff et al., 2022). The high heritability of many mental disorders revealed by twin studies, around 80% for bipolar disorder and schizophrenia and 37% for major depressive disorder (Bienvenu et al., 2011), has lead researchers to search for the genes for depression, yet a genome-wide association meta-analysis of 135,458 cases calculated polygenic risk scores explaining only 1.9% of the variance in liability (Wray et al., 2018). 

Following in the famous dictum of Griesinger “all mental disorders are brain disorders” (Griesinger, 1867) neuroscientists have sought to discover the neurological underpinnings of psychiatric disorders, whether that be in anatomical aberrations or dysfunctional neural connections. Many neuroscientists hold that psychological states as epiphenomenal to brain states, which has implications on how clinicians understand mental disorders and their treatment. For example, example, former director of the NIMH Thomas Insel in 2015 wrote “Paradoxically, one of the most powerful and precise interventions to alter such activity may be targeted psychotherapy, such as cognitive behavioral therapy, which uses the brain’s intrinsic plasticity to alter neural circuits and as a consequence, deleterious thoughts and behavior” (Insel & Cuthbert, 2015) reconceptualizing psychotherapy as neurotherapy.

Box 1. The DSM in its modern form began with the 1980 publication of the DSM-III, in which Spitzer and colleagues moved the DSM away from a psychoanalytic orientation to an atheoretical classification system, where descriptions of symptoms are used as diagnostic criteria for disorders. The explicit goal of the DSM-III was to achieve high diagnostic reliability such as those observed in medicine, allowing researchers and clinicians a common language to communicate and further scientific progress. Though the DSM is agnostic towards the etiology of the identified disorders, making room for various theoretical orientations, the classification system follows that of medicine where signs and symptoms are indicative of an underlying disorder, e.g. a fever and cough are indicative of common viral infections, and therefore the clinical utility of assessing patient symptoms are to pinpoint a diagnosis. You treat the virus, not the cough. Yet, as we have seen, no underlying pathology has been identified for even the most common and studied psychiatric disorders. Continuing to reify DSM classification as natural entities with an underlying essential nature (Kendler et al., 2011; Zachar, 2015) will not yield the advances promised, if they are indeed not (Kupfer et al., 2008).


Advances in functional neuroimaging technology over the past 40 years allow researchers to noninvasively approximate the activity of the brain with relatively strong temporal and spatial resolution (Buckner et al., 2013). This is used in depression studies by, for example, seeing if there are differences in brain activity at rest or when completing certain tasks between depressed and non-depressed participants (Iwabuchi et al., 2015).

As symptom profiles of depression can be diverse (Fried & Nesse, 2015), likely there is no single underlying mechanism (region, circuit, neurotransmitter, connection, etc.) for all who meet the DSM-V diagnosis of major depressive disorder. Rather, a taxonomy of neural mechanisms may be useful to identify which profiles of depression are associated with which underlying neural process. Linking particular symptoms with abnormal brain processes may provide a path to accommodating the heterogeneity of depression while recognizing it as a brain disorder (Insel, 2009). Some of these neural circuits may underly general functions and processes, such as attention, negative emotions, salience detection, and sensory perception. Combinations and interactions of these circuits make contribute to the dysfunctions characteristic of depression, such as rumination, anhedonia, irritability, and motor retardation (Power et al., 2011).

Structural brain differences in those with MDD
In a 2012 review of MRI studies in depression, Arnone et al (Arnone et al., 2012) found that in comparison with healthy controls, those with MDD showed no differences in whole brain volume , nor differences in volume of CSF, thalamus, temporal lobes, amygdala, and corpus callosum. Reductions were found in volume of the frontal cortex (d = -0.57; 95% CI = −0.93, −0.21), hippocampus (d = −0.26; 95% CI: −0.39, −0.13), right anterior cingulate cortex (d = −0.35; 95% CI: −0.63, −0.08), caudate nucleus (d = −0.33; 95% CI: −0.62), and pituitary gland (d = 0.49; 95% CI: 0.20, 0.77). 

As a potential confounder in cross-sectional structural MRI studies is medication use (structural changes in those with MDD might be caused by medication, rather than the MDD), Zhao et al (Zhao et al., 2014) investigated structural abnormalities in unmedicated MDD patients compared to healthy controls. Reduced grey matter volume in the left inferior frontal gyrus, right middle frontal gyrus, bilateral superior frontal gyrus, bilateral parahippocampal gyrus, and hippocampus was found. Convergence with the previous review was found for frontal cortical regions, and the hippocampus, which may be crucial to observed impairments in executive function and memory in those with MDD. 

Functional brain differences in those with MDD
Baseline neural activity 
In those with MDD show higher activity in the pulvinar nucleus of the thalamus (Hamilton et al., 2012) which is a structure part the pathway responsible for the emotional salience of biologically relevant visual stimuli (Pessoa & Adolphs, 2010). MDD patients also had greater regional homogeneity in the medial superior frontal gyrus and left fusiform gyrus, and decreased regional homogeneity in areas including the left cerebellum, left Rolandic operculum, and the right inferior parietal gyrus (Iwabuchi et al., 2015). Regional homogeneity describes the local functional connectivity of a node (brain area) by quantifying how central the node is to the functional connectome (Jiang & Zuo, 2016).

Default Mode Network
A 2015 review by Mulders et al (Mulders et al., 2015) found most consistently an increased connection within anterior regions of the default mode network (DMN), between the DMN and the salience network, and decreased connectivity between the posterior DMN and the central executive network in those with MDD. Though the authors mention generally heterogeneous findings were the norm, which may reflect the heterogeneity of depression.
Depression may be associated with increased connectivity of salience circuits and DMN, increasing salience sensitivity to both interoceptive and external stimuli, and may contribute to the avoidance and withdrawal behaviors of depression. (Mulders et al., 2015). Depression also shows overactivation and hyperconnectivity of default mode circuitry, which may be implicated in rumination (default mode network is associated with reflecting on ones thoughts / self-referential operations) (Hamilton et al., 2015). Also hyperconnectivity between DMN and subgenual prefrontal cortex may facilitate self-referential processes and affective response. May be symptom specific, as Zhu et al (Zhu et al., 2012) found increased functional connectivity in anterior medial regions of the DMN associated with rumination, and decreased functional connectivity in posterior medial regions associated with overgeneralized memory.

Central Executive Network
The central executive network (CEN) is a task-positive network that includes regions of the prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, posterior parietal cortex, and inferior temporal cortex, and is responsible for attention, regulation of emotional processing, and goal-directed behavior. In MDD patients, increased functional connectivity was found between the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and the left anterior cingulate, left parahippocampal gyrus, thalamus, and precentral gyrus, with reduced connectivity to the parietal lobe (Ye et al., 2012).

Another study by Wang et al (Wang et al., 2016) found a reduction in functional connectivity between the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and the left cuneus, left lingual gyrus, and right anterior cingulate in patients with MDD. Moreover, the changed functional connectivity between the dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex and right anterior cingulate had a positive correlation with executive function in MDD.

Anhedonia
The inability to experience pleasure is one of two core DSM-V symptoms used to diagnose MDD, and is clinically significant in approximately 37% of those diagnosed with MDD (Pelizza & Ferrari, 2009) and has motivation and affective dimensions (wanting vs liking) which may have distinct neurobiological pathways (Treadway & Zald, 2011). The motivational dimension can be linked to the dopamine reward system, which features the substantia nigra and the ventral tegmental area, which produces the neurotransmitter dopamine. Some evidence in those with MDD has shown associations with abnormal dopamine functioning (Cannon et al., 2009) while another study in medication-naïve MDD patients show no difference in dopamine receptor availability compared to controls (Hirvonen et al., 2008). Effects on the dopamine system are also shown in common antidepressants, suggesting a role of these systems in the antidepressant response (Gershon et al., 2007). Inconsistent findings may be due to dopamine having differential links to specific symptoms, such as psychomotor retardation (Bragulat et al., 2007). 

fMRI studies generally show reduced activity in reward system regions in response to received and anticipated rewards in those with MDD. For example, Pizzagalli et al (Pizzagalli et al., 2009) demonstrated reduced nucleus accumbens and caudate response to monetary gains in those with MDD compared to healthy controls, but no difference in anticipatory reward. Smoski et al (Smoski et al., 2009) found reduced activity in striatal reward regions in response to reward selection, anticipation, and feedback. In a meta-analysis of fMRI studies comparing MDD patients with healthy controls during various reward tasks, Zhang et al (Zhang et al., 2013) found decreased subcortical and limbic activity, and increased cortical activity. They also found reduced caudate activation during monetary anticipation and reward, and increased middle frontal gyrus and dorsal anterior cingulate activation during reward anticipation. These findings show that different brain areas contribute to the impaired response to anticipated and actual reward in those with MDD, which may be the underlying mechanism of anhedonia.

Negative affect bias circuitry
Those with depression tend to demonstrate a bias towards interpreting facial expressions as displaying more negative affect than they are, as well as process negative faces faster than positive faces. Stuhrmann et al (Stuhrmann et al., 2011) in a systematic review found this negative response bias correlated with greater activation in the amygdala (compared to healthy controls), as well as in other limbic structures such as the insula. Greater activation in the motor cortex was also found during sad and angry facial processing, which may contribute to the depressive symptom of psychomotor agitation. Greater activation of the cingulate gyrus was found in response to sad facial stimuli. In response to positive facial stimuli, decreased activity was found in the amygdala, insula, hippocampus, and, putamen, converging with previous findings of slower processing of positive faces.

Emotional reactivity
Depressed subjects demonstrate increased limbic (amygdala) activity while completing emotionally-ladened tasks, and decreased dorsolateral prefrontal cortex activity while completing cognitive tasks, and decreased relationships between these areas (Siegle et al., 2007). In response to negative stimuli, reliable increased responses in the amygdala, dorsal anterior cingulate cortex, and insula were found (Hamilton et al., 2012).

Unsurprisingly, hyperactivation of amygdala in response to threatening and negative stimuli was found in MDD patients, even when not conscious of the stimuli (Jaworska et al., 2015). Increased amygdala activity was also found across many valanced stimuli, indicating increased emotional reactivity in general (Yang et al., 2010). Decreased functional coupling (i.e., co-activation) between the amygdala and supragenual  cingulate was found in depressed subjects compared to controls in response to emotional faces, which also correlated with greater symptom severity (Matthews et al., 2008).

Cognitive functions 
Cognitive functions are also likely to be impaired in those with MDD. A recent meta-analysis of 48 structural MRI studies by Zackova et al (Zackova et al., 2021) found volumetric reductions in areas of all four lobes, specifically in the left striatum, cingulate cortex, insula, and frontal, temporal, and occipital gyri in those with MDD and mild cognitive impairment when compared to age-matched healthy controls. Mild cognitive impairment was particularly associated with reductions in the insula and Rolandic operculum.

Using standardized cognitive and emotion tasks, Korgaonkar et al (Korgaonkar et al., 2013) found that MDD patients were similarly accurate, but significantly slower on performance across cognitive tasks. During select cognitive tasks, increased activation of the anterior cingulate cortex was found in those with MDD, as well as decreased activation of the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. In response to negative emotion tasks, MDD patients showed decreased activation of the dorsolateral frontal cortex, while positive emotion tasks showed decreased activation of the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex. During digit sorting and emotional information processing tasks, Siegle et al (Siegle et al., 2007) showed decreased dorsolateral prefrontal cortex activation on the digit sorting task, and sustained amygdala activity on the emotional task in those with MDD. These findings suggest that during cognitive tasks, MDD patients show reduced activity in frontal regions, which is a possible mechanism for the impaired cognitive performance in this population. 

HPA Axis
The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis governs and regulates important hormones critical for various physiological functions such as stress, mood, digestion, and sexual arousal (Del Rey et al., 2008). Adverse early life experiences can cause long term changes in HPA axis activity in both rodents and humans (Heim & Nemeroff, 2002; Sanchez et al., 2001), potentially making one physiologically more vulnerable to stressors. For example, a recent study found that depressed patients who did not respond to treatment did not show any abnormalities in HPA axis functioning. In contrast, untreated depressed patients had higher cortisol levels throughout the day than patients taking antidepressants, and a higher prevalence of glucocorticoid resistance compared to both medicated patients and controls. The severity of childhood trauma was only associated with increased cortisol levels in individuals with glucocorticoid resistance. These findings suggest that the degree of childhood trauma contributes to the lack of response to antidepressant treatment, and the impact of childhood trauma on increased cortisol levels is particularly evident in patients with glucocorticoid resistance (Nikkheslat et al., 2020). 

Though, not all MDD patients display observable abnormalities in HPA axis functioning, possibly being more common in certain subtypes such as melancholic depression (Juruena et al., 2018). Further, no clinical test for HPA axis dysfunction is routinely used, and no drug treatments targeting the HPA axis have been approved (Menke, 2019).

Animal models of depression. Using animals, we can study the neurobiology suspected to underly depression at a level of resolution impractical in human subjects. For example, Krishnan et al demonstrated that a social avoidance response to chronic social defeat in mice is mediated by increases in levels of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (Krishnan et al., 2007). Experimental drug treatments are also best tested initially on non-human subjects to understand the pharmacological mechanisms of action and potential harms. A recently systematic review and meta-analysis by Stukalin et al (Stukalin et al., 2020) estimated that prototypical antidepressants reduced immobility behavior in mice during the tail suspension test (thought to be an analog of despair) by an effect size of d = 1.475 to d = 3.024 depending on strain and protocol, though no dose-response relationship was found.

As there is no principal pathophysiology of depression, studies do use animals as models of depression like how the pathophysiology of cancer is induced in mice and used as a model of cancer. Rather, depression-like symptoms are induced and treated, and the neurophysiology corresponding to those events are described. An early example of this is a 1987 study where Willner et al (Willner et al., 1987) exposed rats to chronic mild stress, inducing anhedonia-like symptoms (reduced preference of sugar water), which reversed with antidepressants. A more recent study induced anhedonia-like symptoms by social isolation in rodents which corresponded to decreased cyclic adenosine monophosphate response element-binding protein activity in the nucleus accumbens, though its recovery from chronic antidepressant treatment was not (Wallace et al., 2009).

Animals may only be able to model particular aspects of some symptoms, rather than the disorder as a whole. For example, mice engineered to have the Hoxb8 mutant gene display compulsive grooming behaviors, thought to correspond to behaviors exhibited by those with obsessive-compulsive disorder (Chen et al., 2010). A common method to induce ‘depression’ in rodents is the 5-day repeated forced swim stress (5-d RFSS) where progressive immobility/floating behavior is observed over time, which is thought to correspond to a depressed-like state of despair. Despite the popularity of this method for inducing animal depression, the 5-d RFSS did not induce other symptom-like behaviors such as “sucrose preference, body weight, appetite, locomotor activity, anxiety-like behavior, or immobility behavior during a tail-suspension test compared with non stressed controls.” (Mul et al., 2016).  
 
Figure 1.

Limitations of animal models
Due to the diagnosis of depression being limited to a mix of self-reported subjective symptoms (i.e., anhedonia, depressed mood, fatigue, concentration issues, suicidal ideation) and behaviors (i.e., psychomotor agitation/retardation, insomnia/hypersomnia, weight gain/loss), having a fully faithful animal model of depression is improbable (Nestler & Hyman, 2010). Many of the symptoms of depression are mental states which rationally follow from its content (Searle & Willis, 1983). For example, suicidal ideation may rationally follow from the belief that one’s life is a burden on others (which itself may be an irrational belief) (Beck, 1979)The general properties of a mental state (e.g., affective valence, physiological arousal, intensity) may be encoded in the nervous system (at the circuit level or otherwise) and therefore have animal analogs. Given this, there are two fundamental reasons for why anything approaching a complete animal model of depression cannot exist. 

Firstly, animals do not have the capacity for many of the cognitive features of depression (e.g., ruminating about the past, worry about the future, feeling guilty or worthless, etc.). If these cognitions are not merely epiphenomenal, and rather they have causal power (e.g., worry about the future causing a cascade of neurophysiological events (Sapolsky, 2004)), then a model of depression lacking the capacity for cognitive content would be missing an important and explanatory piece of the puzzle. Secondly, if the specific content of these mental states, and their rational connections to specific emotional states and behaviors (e.g., thinking one is a burden to others is related to feeling worthless and suicidal behaviors) cannot be described at the neural level of description, then even if animals possessed the mental contents crucial in the etiology and course of depression, we would be unable to identify these contents if they are unable to self-report them.

Though specific symptoms may be induced through animal models, many behavioral manifestations may be multiply realizable (Funkhouser, 2007), so even if, for example, we traced the effect of this mutant gene to a downstream neurobiological process, it is not necessarily the same neurobiological process operating in the human manifestation of the behavior. Similarly, two humans displaying the same behavioral indication of a psychiatric disorder may not have the same neurobiological process underpinning the behavior.

Limitations of neuroimaging studies
Concerning the neuroimaging studies of depression, most of the designs used are case-control (as you can not randomized people into MDD as you would in a true experiment). Limitations of case-control design are that there are an infinite number of potential confounders that are not controlled for. For example, there may be a common cause of both MDD and the neurobiological differences observed in an MDD patient, such as adverse childhood experiences. In a large randomized controlled trial, these confounders are assumed to be equally distributed across experimental arms, and are thus ignorable. 

Further, many of the studies cited were cross-sectional associations between neurobiology and depression. The obvious limitations of this design is the inability to distinguish between and within-subject variance. For example, between-person differences in functional connectivity may be associated with between-person differences in depression severity (e.g., those with lower functional connectivity between region A and B also experience higher depression severity), or functional connectivity and depression severity may be associated within the same person (e.g., as functional connectivity decreases in a person, their depression tends to increase).

It is also important to note many of these neural correlates of depression are also found in many other disorders (anxiety disorders, PTSD, etc.) which may indicate transdiagnostic mechanisms across these disorders, or that the boundaries between disorders are fuzzy and ill-defined. As the history of the DSM is full of arbitrary decisions (Davies, 2013), many of the diagnostic categories we recognize almost certainly do not exist in nature (Kendler et al., 2011).

Finding neurobiological correlates (fMRI, biochemical, etc.) are not adequate in themselves as explanations for the etiology of mental disorders, nor do they even necessarily advance treatment. The most common antidepressants used are those that were developed in the 70s and 80s (Harrington, 2019). 

Limitations of reductionism
The reductionist view of mental disorders posits that the symptomatology of any particular disorder are signs of underlying abnormal brain processes, and further that the essence of mental disorders can be found at the level of biology, principally identical to how the essence of type II diabetes is cellular insulin insensitivity. All the symptoms of type II diabetes (e.g., fatigue, blurred vision, frequent infections) are unilaterally caused by the insulin insensitivity. If all mental disorders are indeed brain disorders, then identifying these underlying abnormal neurobiological processes should explain the observed clusters of symptoms, mechanisms of etiology, and advance treatment. Thus, the quest for identifying biomarkers and neural correlates of various mental disorders. But if depression is an emergent state from the interactions of causally related cognitions, emotions, and behaviors, then this reductionist approach is entirely inadequate and excluding an important level of description by privileging the brain (Borsboom et al., 2019).

Future directions: The role of neuroscience in the study of depression
As shown in Figure 2, neurobiological differences can predispose one to experience particular symptoms (i.e., sensitivity to emotional stimuli) which can cause a cascade of other symptoms. Symptom experiences may also cause neurobiological changes (i.e., sleep disturbance causing dysregulated HPA axis functioning) which may feed back into other symptoms (i.e., dysregulated HPA axis functioning causing depressed mood). Some of these causal relations are biological and can be described in such terms, for example sleep disturbance causing fatigue and fatigue causing trouble concentrating may all be reduced to changes in neurobiological states. Other causal relations may not be reducible to neurobiological states, such as the link between feeling worthless and suicidal ideation. This relation features a rational, rather than biological, connection between feeling worthless and wanting to end ones life. Thus, including a psychological level of description may be necessary to fully understanding this network of depression. Understanding how neurobiological differences, as part of an ‘external field’ (Borsboom, 2017), can contribute to experiencing a symptom that may initiate the activation of a depressive network.

 Figure 2.
As experimentally inducing depression is ethically questionable, collecting longitudinal data at various timescales to observe how a persons neurobiological markers and symptom levels change over the onset and course of a depressive episode will help elucidate the causal relationships operating (i.e., neurobiological-symptom, and symptom-symptom relationships). For example, a stressful life event may impact functioning of the HPA axis and increase circulating glucocorticoid levels, influencing the functioning of various brain networks. These changes may then predispose one to insomnia, weight changes, and trouble concentrating, which themselves may cause other symptoms (i.e., depressed mood, guilt, anxiety, etc.).

Further, understanding the temporal dynamics of these symptoms and neurobiological changes has treatment implications. If depressed mood appears early in activation of a depressive network, then treatments that are especially effective at targeting depressed mood, such as antidepressants, are indicated (Fried et al., 2015). Identifying upstream symptoms and intervening early in the causal chain of events provides a promising way to treatment depression, given that depression is indeed characterized as a causal system. 

Conclusion
Though neuroscientific advances have progressed rapidly in the past three decades, typical treatments for depression have not. Decades old antidepressants and cognitive-behavioral therapy remain the frontline treatment options (Park & Zarate Jr, 2019), and electroconvulsive therapy is still used for treatment-resistant depression. Further, placebo remains a large problem in evaluating the efficacy of treatments (Kirsch, 2019), as depression is particularly sensitive to contextual and non-specific effects. 

Heterogenous findings also plague the imaging literature. A promising direction is moving towards identifying circuits underlying specific symptoms, to account for the variety of possible symptom profiles in depression. Though, as stated previously, it is unlikely that the causal relations between symptoms that contain mental contents are encoded at the level of neurobiology. Rather, using neuroscientific tools to investigate how certain symptoms may be predisposed to neurobiological risk factors, and how these symptoms then activate a network of depression, may be the best way forward.

The National Institute of Mental Health has promoted the use of neurobiological measures when funding studies on mental disorders (Woody & Gibb, 2015) for over a decade, and as the former director of the NIMH and promoter of the RDoC said in 2017, “I spent 13 years at NIMH really pushing on the neuroscience and genetics of mental disorders, and when I look back on that I realize that while I think I succeeded at getting lots of really cool papers published by cool scientists at fairly large costs---I think $20 billion---I don’t think we moved the needle in reducing suicide, reducing hospitalizations, improving recovery for the tens of millions of people who have mental illness. I hold myself accountable for that.” (Rogers, 2017). 





Arnone, D., McIntosh, A., Ebmeier, K., Munafò, M., & Anderson, I. (2012). Magnetic resonance imaging studies in unipolar depression: systematic review and meta-regression analyses. European Neuropsychopharmacology, 22(1), 1-16. 
Beck, A. T. (1979). Cognitive therapy and the emotional disorders. Penguin. 
Bienvenu, O. J., Davydow, D. S., & Kendler, K. (2011). Psychiatric ‘diseases’ versus behavioral disorders and degree of genetic influence. Psychological medicine, 41(1), 33-40. 
Borsboom, D. (2017). A network theory of mental disorders. World Psychiatry, 16(1), 5-13. 
Borsboom, D., Cramer, A. O., & Kalis, A. (2019). Brain disorders? Not really: Why network structures block reductionism in psychopathology research. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 42, e2. 
Bragulat, V., Paillère-Martinot, M.-L., Artiges, E., Frouin, V., Poline, J.-B., & Martinot, J.-L. (2007). Dopaminergic function in depressed patients with affective flattening or with impulsivity:[18F] fluoro-L-dopa positron emission tomography study with voxel-based analysis. Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging, 154(2), 115-124. 
Buckner, R. L., Krienen, F. M., & Yeo, B. T. (2013). Opportunities and limitations of intrinsic functional connectivity MRI. Nature neuroscience, 16(7), 832-837. 
Cannon, D. M., Klaver, J. M., Peck, S. A., Rallis-Voak, D., Erickson, K., & Drevets, W. C. (2009). Dopamine type-1 receptor binding in major depressive disorder assessed using positron emission tomography and [11C] NNC-112. Neuropsychopharmacology, 34(5), 1277-1287. 
Chadwick, J., & Mann, W. N. (1950). The medical works of Hippocrates. Oxford Blackwell Scientific Publications. 
Chen, S.-K., Tvrdik, P., Peden, E., Cho, S., Wu, S., Spangrude, G., & Capecchi, M. R. (2010). Hematopoietic origin of pathological grooming in Hoxb8 mutant mice. Cell, 141(5), 775-785. 
Collaborators, G. M. D. (2022). Global, regional, and national burden of 12 mental disorders in 204 countries and territories, 1990–2019: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. The Lancet Psychiatry, 9(2), 137-150. 
Coppen, A. (1967). The biochemistry of affective disorders. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 113(504), 1237-1264. 
Davies, J. (2013). Cracked: The unhappy truth about psychiatry. Open Road Media. 
Del Rey, A., Chrousos, G., & Besedovsky, H. (2008). The hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis. Elsevier. 
Fried, E. I., Boschloo, L., Van Borkulo, C. D., Schoevers, R. A., Romeijn, J.-W., Wichers, M., De Jonge, P., Nesse, R. M., Tuerlinckx, F., & Borsboom, D. (2015). Commentary:“Consistent superiority of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors over placebo in reducing depressed mood in patients with major depression”. Frontiers in psychiatry, 6, 117. 
Fried, E. I., & Nesse, R. M. (2015). Depression is not a consistent syndrome: An investigation of unique symptom patterns in the STAR* D study. Journal of Affective Disorders, 172, 96-102. 
Funkhouser, E. (2007). Multiple realizability. Philosophy Compass, 2(2), 303-315. 
Gershon, A. A., Vishne, T., & Grunhaus, L. (2007). Dopamine D2-like receptors and the antidepressant response. Biological Psychiatry, 61(2), 145-153. 
Griesinger, W. (1867). Die pathologie und therapie der psychischen krankheiten: für aerzte und studirende. Adolph Krabbe. 
Guze, S. B. (1992). Why psychiatry is a branch of medicine. Oxford University Press. 
Hamilton, J. P., Etkin, A., Furman, D. J., Lemus, M. G., Johnson, R. F., & Gotlib, I. H. (2012). Functional neuroimaging of major depressive disorder: a meta-analysis and new integration of baseline activation and neural response data. American Journal of Psychiatry, 169(7), 693-703. 
Hamilton, J. P., Farmer, M., Fogelman, P., & Gotlib, I. H. (2015). Depressive rumination, the default-mode network, and the dark matter of clinical neuroscience. Biological Psychiatry, 78(4), 224-230. 
Harrington, A. (2019). Mind fixers: Psychiatry's troubled search for the biology of mental illness. WW Norton & Company. 
Health, T. L. G. (2020). Mental health matters. The Lancet. Global Health, 8(11), e1352. 
Heim, C., & Nemeroff, C. B. (2002). Neurobiology of early life stress: clinical studies. Seminars in clinical neuropsychiatry, 
Hirvonen, J., Karlsson, H., Kajander, J., Markkula, J., Rasi-Hakala, H., Någren, K., Salminen, J. K., & Hietala, J. (2008). Striatal dopamine D 2 receptors in medication-naive patients with major depressive disorder as assessed with [11 C] raclopride PET. Psychopharmacology, 197, 581-590. 
Insel, T. R. (2009). Translating scientific opportunity into public health impact: a strategic plan for research on mental illness. Archives of general psychiatry, 66(2), 128-133. 
Insel, T. R., & Cuthbert, B. N. (2015). Brain disorders? precisely. Science, 348(6234), 499-500. 
Iwabuchi, S. J., Krishnadas, R., Li, C., Auer, D. P., Radua, J., & Palaniyappan, L. (2015). Localized connectivity in depression: a meta-analysis of resting state functional imaging studies. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 51, 77-86. 
Jaworska, N., Yang, X.-R., Knott, V., & MacQueen, G. (2015). A review of fMRI studies during visual emotive processing in major depressive disorder. The World Journal of Biological Psychiatry, 16(7), 448-471. 
Jiang, L., & Zuo, X.-N. (2016). Regional homogeneity: a multimodal, multiscale neuroimaging marker of the human connectome. The Neuroscientist, 22(5), 486-505. 
Juruena, M. F., Bocharova, M., Agustini, B., & Young, A. H. (2018). Atypical depression and non-atypical depression: Is HPA axis function a biomarker? A systematic review. Journal of Affective Disorders, 233, 45-67. 
Kendler, K. S., Zachar, P., & Craver, C. (2011). What kinds of things are psychiatric disorders? Psychological medicine, 41(6), 1143-1150. 
Kirsch, I. (2019). Placebo effect in the treatment of depression and anxiety. Frontiers in psychiatry, 407. 
Korgaonkar, M. S., Grieve, S. M., Etkin, A., Koslow, S. H., & Williams, L. M. (2013). Using standardized fMRI protocols to identify patterns of prefrontal circuit dysregulation that are common and specific to cognitive and emotional tasks in major depressive disorder: first wave results from the iSPOT-D study. Neuropsychopharmacology, 38(5), 863-871. 
Krishnan, V., Han, M.-H., Graham, D. L., Berton, O., Renthal, W., Russo, S. J., LaPlant, Q., Graham, A., Lutter, M., & Lagace, D. C. (2007). Molecular adaptations underlying susceptibility and resistance to social defeat in brain reward regions. Cell, 131(2), 391-404. 
Kruijshaar, M. E., Barendregt, J., Vos, T., De Graaf, R., Spijker, J., & Andrews, G. (2005). Lifetime prevalence estimates of major depression: an indirect estimation method and a quantification of recall bias. European journal of epidemiology, 20, 103-111. 
Kupfer, D. J., First, M. B., & Regier, D. A. (2008). A research agenda for DSM V. 
Matthews, S. C., Strigo, I. A., Simmons, A. N., Yang, T. T., & Paulus, M. P. (2008). Decreased functional coupling of the amygdala and supragenual cingulate is related to increased depression in unmedicated individuals with current major depressive disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 111(1), 13-20. 
Menke, A. (2019). Is the HPA axis as target for depression outdated, or is there a new hope? Frontiers in psychiatry, 10, 101. 
Moncrieff, J., Cooper, R. E., Stockmann, T., Amendola, S., Hengartner, M. P., & Horowitz, M. A. (2022). The serotonin theory of depression: a systematic umbrella review of the evidence. Molecular psychiatry, 1-14. 
Mueller, T. I., Leon, A. C., Keller, M. B., Solomon, D. A., Endicott, J., Coryell, W., Warshaw, M., & Maser, J. D. (1999). Recurrence after recovery from major depressive disorder during 15 years of observational follow-up. American Journal of Psychiatry, 156(7), 1000-1006. 
Mul, J. D., Zheng, J., & Goodyear, L. J. (2016). Validity assessment of 5 day repeated forced-swim stress to model human depression in young-adult C57BL/6J and BALB/cJ mice. Eneuro, 3(6). 
Mulders, P. C., van Eijndhoven, P. F., Schene, A. H., Beckmann, C. F., & Tendolkar, I. (2015). Resting-state functional connectivity in major depressive disorder: a review. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 56, 330-344. 
Nestler, E. J., & Hyman, S. E. (2010). Animal models of neuropsychiatric disorders. Nature neuroscience, 13(10), 1161-1169. 
Nikkheslat, N., McLaughlin, A. P., Hastings, C., Zajkowska, Z., Nettis, M. A., Mariani, N., Enache, D., Lombardo, G., Pointon, L., & Cowen, P. J. (2020). Childhood trauma, HPA axis activity and antidepressant response in patients with depression. Brain, behavior, and immunity, 87, 229-237. 
Panchal, U., Salazar de Pablo, G., Franco, M., Moreno, C., Parellada, M., Arango, C., & Fusar-Poli, P. (2021). The impact of COVID-19 lockdown on child and adolescent mental health: systematic review. European child & adolescent psychiatry, 1-27. 
Park, L. T., & Zarate Jr, C. A. (2019). Depression in the primary care setting. New England Journal of Medicine, 380(6), 559-568. 
Patel, K., Robertson, E., Kwong, A. S., Griffith, G. J., Willan, K., Green, M. J., Di Gessa, G., Huggins, C. F., McElroy, E., & Thompson, E. J. (2022). Psychological distress before and during the COVID-19 pandemic among adults in the United Kingdom based on coordinated analyses of 11 longitudinal studies. JAMA Network open, 5(4), e227629-e227629. 
Pelizza, L., & Ferrari, A. (2009). Anhedonia in schizophrenia and major depression: state or trait? Annals of General Psychiatry, 8(1), 1-9. 
Pessoa, L., & Adolphs, R. (2010). Emotion processing and the amygdala: from a'low road'to'many roads' of evaluating biological significance. Nature reviews neuroscience, 11(11), 773-782. 
Pizzagalli, D. A., Holmes, A. J., Dillon, D. G., Goetz, E. L., Birk, J. L., Bogdan, R., Dougherty, D. D., Iosifescu, D. V., Rauch, S. L., & Fava, M. (2009). Reduced caudate and nucleus accumbens response to rewards in unmedicated individuals with major depressive disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 166(6), 702-710. 
Porter, R. (2003). Madness: A brief history. OUP Oxford. 
Power, J. D., Cohen, A. L., Nelson, S. M., Wig, G. S., Barnes, K. A., Church, J. A., Vogel, A. C., Laumann, T. O., Miezin, F. M., & Schlaggar, B. L. (2011). Functional network organization of the human brain. Neuron, 72(4), 665-678. 
Prati, G., & Mancini, A. D. (2021). The psychological impact of COVID-19 pandemic lockdowns: a review and meta-analysis of longitudinal studies and natural experiments. Psychological medicine, 51(2), 201-211. 
Rogers, A. (2017). Star Neuroscientist Tom Insel Leaves the Google-Spawned Verily for ... a Startup? Wired. https://www.wired.com/2017/05/star-neuroscientist-tom-insel-leaves-google-spawned-verily-startup/
Samji, H., Wu, J., Ladak, A., Vossen, C., Stewart, E., Dove, N., Long, D., & Snell, G. (2022). Mental health impacts of the COVID‐19 pandemic on children and youth–a systematic review. Child and adolescent mental health, 27(2), 173-189. 
Sanchez, M. M., Ladd, C. O., & Plotsky, P. M. (2001). Early adverse experience as a developmental risk factor for later psychopathology: evidence from rodent and primate models. Development and psychopathology, 13(3), 419-449. 
Sapolsky, R. M. (2004). Why zebras don't get ulcers: The acclaimed guide to stress, stress-related diseases, and coping. Holt paperbacks. 
Searle, J. R., & Willis, S. (1983). Intentionality: An essay in the philosophy of mind. Cambridge university press. 
Siegle, G. J., Thompson, W., Carter, C. S., Steinhauer, S. R., & Thase, M. E. (2007). Increased amygdala and decreased dorsolateral prefrontal BOLD responses in unipolar depression: related and independent features. Biological Psychiatry, 61(2), 198-209. 
Smoski, M. J., Felder, J., Bizzell, J., Green, S. R., Ernst, M., Lynch, T. R., & Dichter, G. S. (2009). fMRI of alterations in reward selection, anticipation, and feedback in major depressive disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 118(1-3), 69-78. 
Stuhrmann, A., Suslow, T., & Dannlowski, U. (2011). Facial emotion processing in major depression: a systematic review of neuroimaging findings. Biology of mood & anxiety disorders, 1(1), 1-17. 
Stukalin, Y., Lan, A., & Einat, H. (2020). Revisiting the validity of the mouse tail suspension test: systematic review and meta-analysis of the effects of prototypic antidepressants. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 112, 39-47. 
Treadway, M. T., & Zald, D. H. (2011). Reconsidering anhedonia in depression: lessons from translational neuroscience. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 35(3), 537-555. 
Wallace, D. L., Han, M.-H., Graham, D. L., Green, T. A., Vialou, V., Iniguez, S. D., Cao, J.-L., Kirk, A., Chakravarty, S., & Kumar, A. (2009). CREB regulation of nucleus accumbens excitability mediates social isolation–induced behavioral deficits. Nature neuroscience, 12(2), 200-209. 
Wang, Y.-l., Yang, S.-z., Sun, W.-l., Shi, Y.-z., & Duan, H.-f. (2016). Altered functional interaction hub between affective network and cognitive control network in patients with major depressive disorder. Behavioural brain research, 298, 301-309. 
Whiteford, H. A., Degenhardt, L., Rehm, J., Baxter, A. J., Ferrari, A. J., Erskine, H. E., Charlson, F. J., Norman, R. E., Flaxman, A. D., & Johns, N. (2013). Global burden of disease attributable to mental and substance use disorders: findings from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. The Lancet, 382(9904), 1575-1586. 
Willner, P., Towell, A., Sampson, D., Sophokleous, S., & Muscat, R. a. (1987). Reduction of sucrose preference by chronic unpredictable mild stress, and its restoration by a tricyclic antidepressant. Psychopharmacology, 93, 358-364. 
Wilson, J. K., & Reynolds, E. H. (1990). Translation and analysis of a cuneiform text forming part of a Babylonian treatise on epilepsy. Medical history, 34(2), 185-198. 
Woody, M. L., & Gibb, B. E. (2015). Integrating NIMH research domain criteria (RDoC) into depression research. Current opinion in psychology, 4, 6-12. 
Wray, N. R., Ripke, S., Mattheisen, M., Trzaskowski, M., Byrne, E. M., Abdellaoui, A., Adams, M. J., Agerbo, E., Air, T. M., & Andlauer, T. M. (2018). Genome-wide association analyses identify 44 risk variants and refine the genetic architecture of major depression. Nature genetics, 50(5), 668-681. 
Yang, T. T., Simmons, A. N., Matthews, S. C., Tapert, S. F., Frank, G. K., Max, J. E., Bischoff-Grethe, A., Lansing, A. E., Brown, G., & Strigo, I. A. (2010). Adolescents with major depression demonstrate increased amygdala activation. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 49(1), 42-51. 
Ye, T., Peng, J., Nie, B., Gao, J., Liu, J., Li, Y., Wang, G., Ma, X., Li, K., & Shan, B. (2012). Altered functional connectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode patients with major depressive disorder. European journal of radiology, 81(12), 4035-4040. 
Zachar, P. (2015). Psychiatric disorders: natural kinds made by the world or practical kinds made by us? World Psychiatry, 14(3), 288. 
Zackova, L., Jani, M., Brázdil, M., Nikolova, Y. S., & Marečková, K. (2021). Cognitive impairment and depression: Meta-analysis of structural magnetic resonance imaging studies. NeuroImage: Clinical, 32, 102830. 
Zhang, W.-N., Chang, S.-H., Guo, L.-Y., Zhang, K.-L., & Wang, J. (2013). The neural correlates of reward-related processing in major depressive disorder: a meta-analysis of functional magnetic resonance imaging studies. Journal of Affective Disorders, 151(2), 531-539. 
Zhao, Y.-J., Du, M.-Y., Huang, X.-Q., Lui, S., Chen, Z.-Q., Liu, J., Luo, Y., Wang, X.-L., Kemp, G., & Gong, Q.-Y. (2014). Brain grey matter abnormalities in medication-free patients with major depressive disorder: a meta-analysis. Psychological medicine, 44(14), 2927-2937. 
Zhu, X., Wang, X., Xiao, J., Liao, J., Zhong, M., Wang, W., & Yao, S. (2012). Evidence of a dissociation pattern in resting-state default mode network connectivity in first-episode, treatment-naive major depression patients. Biological Psychiatry, 71(7), 611-617. 

